# Setup

![Step 1 of a Lego instruction booklet: a single Lego piece](i/lego-step-one.png)

Ahh, step 1. Don't you love a fresh start on a blank slate? And then selecting
that singular brick onto which you will build your entire palatial estate?

Unfortunately, when you're building a computer program, step 1 can get...
complicated. And frustrating. You have to make sure your environment is set up
for the programming language you're using, and you have to figure out how to
compile and run your program in that environment.

Fortunately, the program we are building doesn't depend on any external
libraries, so you don't need anything beyond a C compiler and the standard
library it comes with. To check whether you have a C compiler installed, try
running `cc --version` at the command line. (`cc` stands for "C Compiler".)

(_TODO_: Instructions for installing a C compiler for Windows, Mac, and Linux.)

## The `main()` function

Create a new file named `kilo.c` and give it a `main()` function. (`kilo` is
the name of the text editor we are building.)

{{main}}

In C, you have to put all your executable code inside functions. The `main()`
function in C is special. It is the default starting point when you run your
program. When you `return` from the `main()` function, the program exits
and passes the returned integer back to the operating system. A return value of
`0` indicates success.

C is a compiled language. That means we need to run our program through a C
compiler to turn it into an executable file. We then run that executable like
we would run any other program on the command line.

To compile `kilo.c`, run `cc kilo.c -o kilo` in your shell. If no errors occur,
this will produce an executable named `kilo`. `-o` stands for "output", and
specifies that the output executable should be named `kilo`.

To run `kilo`, type `./kilo` in your shell and press enter. The program doesn't
print any output, but you can check its exit status (the value `main()`
returns) by running `echo $?`, which should print `0`.

## Compiling with `make`

Typing `cc kilo.c -o kilo` every time you want to recompile gets tiring. The
`make` program allows you to simply run `make` and it will compile your program
for you. You just have to supply a `Makefile` to tell it how to compile your
program.

{{makefile}}

The first line says that `kilo` is something we want to build, and that
`kilo.c` is required to build it. The second line specifies the command to run
in order to actually build `kilo` out of `kilo.c`. Make sure to indent the
second line with an actual tab character, and not with spaces. You can indent C
files however you want, but `Makefile`s must use tabs.

We have added a few things to the compilation command. `$(CC)` is a variable
that is expanded to `cc` by default. `-Wall -Wextra -pedantic` are all flags
that tell the compiler to look for any bad usage of the C language and warn us
about it. `-std=c99` specifies the exact version of the C language standard
we're using, which is [C99](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C99). C99 allows us
to declare variables anywhere within a function, whereas
[ANSI C](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_C) requires all variables to be
declared at the top of a function or block.

Now that we have a `Makefile`, try running `make` to compile the program.

(_TODO_: Instructions for installing `make` for Windows, Mac, and Linux.)

It may output ``make: `kilo' is up to date.``. It can tell that the current
version of `kilo.c` has already been compiled by looking at each file's
last-modified timestamp. If `kilo` was last modified after `kilo.c` was last
modified, then `make` doesn't have to do anything. If `kilo.c` was last
modified after `kilo` was, then `make` recompiles `kilo.c`.

Try changing the return value in `kilo.c` to a number other than `0`. Then run
`make`, and you should see it compile. Run `./kilo`, and try `echo $?` to see
if you get the number you changed it to. Then change it back to `0`, recompile,
and make sure it's back to returning `0`.

After each step in this booklet, you will want to recompile `kilo.c`, see if it
finds any errors in your code, and then run `./kilo`. It is easy to forget to
recompile, and just run `./kilo`, and wonder why your changes to `kilo.c` don't
seem to have any effect. You must recompile in order for changes in `kilo.c` to
be reflected in `kilo`.

In the [next chapter](02.enteringRawMode.html), we'll learn how to get the
terminal into *raw mode*, and read individual keypresses from the user.

