# Entering raw mode

Let's try and read keypresses from the user. (The lines you need to add are
highlighted and marked with arrows.)

{{canonical}}

`read()` and `STDIN_FILENO` come from `<unistd.h>`. We are asking `read()` to
read `1` byte from the standard input into the variable `c`, and to keep doing
it until there are no more bytes to read. `read()` returns the number of bytes
that it read, and will return `0` when it reaches the end of a file.

When you run `./kilo`, your terminal gets hooked up to the standard input, and
so your keyboard input gets read into the `c` variable. However, by default
your terminal starts in **canonical mode**, also called **cooked mode**. In
this mode, keyboard input is only sent to your program when the user presses
enter. This is useful for many programs: it lets the user type in a line of
text, use backspace to fix errors until they get their input exactly the way
they want it, and finally press enter to send it to the program. It also makes
sense for programs that work with text one line at a time, like `grep`. But it
does not work well for interactive programs like text editors. We want to
process each keypress as it comes in, so we can respond to it immediately.

What we want is **raw mode**. Unfortunately, there is no simple switch you can
flip to set the terminal to raw mode. Raw mode is achieved by turning off a
great many flags in the terminal, which we will do gradually over the course of
this chapter.

To exit the above program, press `Ctrl-D` to tell `read()` that it's reached
the end of file. Or you can always press `Ctrl-C` to signal the process to
terminate immediately.

## Press `q` to quit?

To demonstrate how canonical mode works, we'll have the program exit when it
reads a `q` keypress from the user. (Lines you need to change are highlighted
and marked the same way as lines you need to add.)

{{press-q}}

To quit this program, you will have to type a line of text that includes a `q`
in it, and then press enter. The program will quickly read the line of text one
character at a time until it reads the `q`, at which point the `while` loop
will stop and the program will exit. Any characters after the `q` will be left
unread on the input queue, and you may see that input being fed into your shell
after your program exits.

## Turn off echoing

We can set a terminal's attributes by using `tcgetattr()` to read them into a
struct, then modifying the struct ourselves, and finally passing the modified
struct to `tcsetattr()` to write the new terminal attributes back out. We'll
start by turning off the `ECHO` feature.

{{echo}}

`struct termios`, `tcgetattr()`, `tcsetattr()`, `ECHO`, and `TCSAFLUSH` all
come from `<termios.h>`.

The `ECHO` feature causes each key you type to be printed to the terminal, so
you can see what you're typing. This is useful in canonical mode, but really
gets in the way when we are trying to carefully render a user interface in raw
mode. So we turn it off. This program does the same thing as the one in the
previous step, it just doesn't print what you are typing. You may be familiar
with this mode if you've ever had to type a password at the terminal, when
using `sudo` for example.

After the program quits, depending on your shell, you may find your terminal is
still not echoing what you type. Don't worry, it will still listen to what you
type. Just press `Ctrl-C` to start a fresh line of input to your shell, and
type in `reset` and press enter. This resets your terminal back to normal in
most cases. Failing that, you can always restart your terminal emulator. We'll
fix this whole problem in the next step.

Terminal attributes can be read into a `termios` struct by `tcgetattr()`. After
modifying them, you can then apply them to the terminal using `tcsetattr()`.
The `TCSAFLUSH` argument specifies when to apply the change: in this case, it
waits for all pending output to be written to the terminal, and also discards
any input that hasn't been read.

The `c_lflag` field stands for "local flags", and a comment in macOS's
`<termios.h>` describes it as a "dumping ground for other state". So perhaps it
should be thought of as "miscellaneous flags". The other flag fields are
`c_iflag` (input flags), `c_oflag` (output flags), and `c_cflag` (control
flags), all of which we will have to modify to fully get into raw mode.

`ECHO` is defined as `0000000000000000000000000001000`, in binary. We use the
bitwise-NOT operator (`~`) on this value to get
`11111111111111111111111111110111`. We then bitwise-AND this value with the
flags field, which forces the fourth bit in the flags field to become `0`, and
causes every other bit to retain its current value. Flipping bits like this is
a common idiom in C.

## Disable raw mode at exit

Let's be nice to the user and restore their terminal's original attributes when
our program exits. We'll save a copy of the `termios` struct in its original
state, and use `tcsetattr()` to apply it to the terminal when the program
exits.

{{atexit}}

`atexit()` comes from `<stdlib.h>`. We use it to register our
`disableRawMode()` function to be called automatically when the program exits,
whether it exits by returning from `main()`, or by calling the `exit()`
function. This way we can ensure we'll leave the terminal attributes the way
we found them when our program exits.

We store the original terminal attributes in a global variable, `orig_termios`,
since there is no other way for `disableRawMode()` to access them. We assign
the `orig_termios` struct to the `raw` struct in order to make a copy of it
before we start making our changes.

You may notice that leftover input is no longer fed into your shell after the
program quits. This is because of the `TCSAFLUSH` option being passed to
`tcsetattr()` when the program exits. As described earlier, it discards any
unread input before applying the changes to the terminal.

## Turn off canonical mode

There is an `ICANON` flag that allows us to turn off canonical mode. This means
we will finally be reading input byte-by-byte, instead of line-by-line.

{{canonical-off}}

`ICANON` comes from `<termios.h>`.

Now the program will quit as soon as you press `q`.

## Display keypresses

To get a better idea of how input in raw mode works, let's print out each
keypress that we `read()`. We'll print each character's numeric ASCII value, as
well as the character it represents if it is a printable character.

{{keypresses}}

`isprint()` comes from `<ctype.h>`, and `printf()` comes from `<stdio.h>`.

`isprint()` tests whether a character is printable. Letters, digits, symbols,
punctuation, and spaces are all printable. Control characters, newlines, tabs,
and the nul character are all considered nonprintable.

`printf()` can print multiple representations of a byte. `%d` tells it to
format the byte as a decimal number (its ASCII code), and `%c` tells it to
write out the byte directly, as a character.

This is a very useful program. It shows us how various keypresses translate
into the bytes we read. Most ordinary keys translate directly into the
characters they represent. But try seeing what happens when you press the arrow
keys, or Escape, or Page Up/Down, or Home and End, or Backspace, or Enter. Try
key combinations with `Ctrl`, like `Ctrl-A`, `Ctrl-B`, etc.

You'll notice a few interesting things:

* Arrow keys, Page Up, Page Down, the Home key, and the End key, all input 3 or
  4 bytes to the terminal: `27`, `'['`, and then one or two other characters.
  This is known as an *escape sequence*. All escape sequences start with a `27`
  byte. Pressing the Escape key sends a single `27` byte as input.
* Backspace is byte `127`. The Delete key is a 4-byte escape sequence.
* Enter is byte `10`, which is a newline, also known as `'\n'`.
* `Ctrl-A` is `1`, `Ctrl-B` is `2`, `Ctrl-C` is... oh, that terminates the
  program, right. But the `Ctrl` key combinations that do work seem to map the
  letters `A..Z` to the codes `1..26`.

By the way, if you happen to press `Ctrl-S`, you may find your program seems to
be frozen. What you've done is you've asked your program to stop sending you
output. Press `Ctrl-Q` to tell it to resume sending you output.

## Turn off `Ctrl-Z` and `Ctrl-C` signals

By default, `Ctrl-C` sends a `SIGINT` signal to the current process which
causes it to terminate, and `Ctrl-Z` sends a `SIGTSTP` signal to the current
process which causes it to suspend. Let's turn off the sending of both of
these signals.

{{isig}}

`ISIG` comes from `<termios.h>`.

Now `Ctrl-C` can be read as a `3` and `Ctrl-Z` can be read as a `26`.

## Turn off `Ctrl-S` and `Ctrl-Q`

By default, `Ctrl-S` and `Ctrl-Q` are used for
[software flow control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_flow_control).
`Ctrl-S` stops data from being transmitted to the terminal until you press
`Ctrl-Q`. This originates in the days when you might want to pause the
transmission of data to let a device like a printer catch up. Let's just turn
off that feature.

{{ixon}}

`IXON` comes from `<termios.h>`.

Now `Ctrl-S` can be read as a `19` and `Ctrl-Q` can be read as a `17`.

The `c_iflag` field contains "input flags", flags having to do with keyboard
input.

## Fix `Ctrl-M`

If you run the program now and go through the whole alphabet while holding down
`Ctrl`, you'll see we have just about every letter except `M` and possibly `V`.
`Ctrl-M` is weird: it's being read as `10`, when we expect it to be read as
`13`, since it is the 13th letter of the alphabet, and `Ctrl-J` already
produces a `10`. What else produces `10`? The enter key does.

It turns out that the terminal is helpfully translating any carriage returns
(`13`, `'\r'`) inputted by the user into newlines (`10`, `'\n'`). This is
another feature we're able to turn off, and we will. We want our input as raw as
possible.

{{ctrl-m}}

`ICRNL` comes from `<termios.h>`.

Now `Ctrl-M` is read as a `13` (carriage return), and the enter key is also
read as a `13`.

## Turn off output processing

It turns out that the terminal does a similar translation on the output side.
It translates each newline (`"\n"`) we print into a carriage return followed by
a newline (`"\r\n"`). The terminal requires both of these characters in order
to start a new line of text. The carriage return moves the cursor to the left
side of the screen, and the newline moves the cursor down a line. But because
it translates newlines into both characters, you can normally just print a
newline character to get a new line in the terminal.

We will turn off all output processing features by turning off the `OPOST`
flag.

{{opost}}

`OPOST` comes from `<termios.h>`.

If you run the program now, you'll see that the newline characters we're
printing are only moving the cursor down, and not to the left side of the
screen. To fix that, let's add carriage returns to our `printf()` statements.

{{carriage-returns}}

From now on, we'll have to write out the full `"\r\n"` whenever we want
to start a new line.

## Fix `Ctrl-V`

We have one more `Ctrl` key combination to fix: `Ctrl-V`. On some systems, when
you type `Ctrl-V`, it waits for you to type another character and then inserts
that character literally. For example, before we disabled `Ctrl-C`, you could
have typed `Ctrl-V` and then `Ctrl-C` to input a `3` byte. We can turn off this
feature using the `IEXTEN` flag.

{{iexten}}

`IEXTEN` comes from `<termios.h>`.

`Ctrl-V` can now be read as `22`.

## Miscellaneous flags

Let's turn off a few more flags.

{{misc-flags}}

`BRKINT`, `INPCK`, `ISTRIP`, and `CS8` all come from `<termios.h>`.

This step probably won't have any observable effect for you, because these
flags are either already turned off, or they don't really apply to modern
terminal emulators. But for "historical reasons", turning them off is generally
accepted to be part of switching into raw mode.

As far as I can tell:

* When `BRKINT` is turned on, a
  [break condition](https://www.cmrr.umn.edu/~strupp/serial.html#2_3_3) will
  cause a `SIGINT` signal to be sent to the program, like pressing `Ctrl-C`.
* `INPCK` enables parity checking, which doesn't seem to apply to modern
  terminal emulators.
* `ISTRIP` causes the 8th bit of each input byte to be stripped, meaning it
  will set it to `0`. I don't know of any keys that send bytes with the 8th
  bit set as input.
* `CS8` sets the character size to 8 bits per byte. On my system, it's already
  set that way.

## Poll for keyboard input

Currently, `read()` will wait indefinitely for input from the keyboard before
it returns. What if we want to do something like animate something on the
screen while waiting for user input? We can set a timeout, so that `read()`
returns if it doesn't get any input for a certain amount of time.

{{vmin-vtime}}

`VMIN` and `VTIME` come from `<termios.h>`.

The `VMIN` value sets the minimum number of bytes of input needed before
`read()` can return. We set it to `0` so that `read()` returns as soon as there
is any input to be read. The `VTIME` value sets the maximum amount of time to
wait before `read()` returns. It is in tenths of a second, so we set it to 1/10
of a second, or 100 milliseconds. If `read()` times out, it will return `0`,
which makes sense because its usual return value is the number of bytes read.

When you run the program, you can see how often it polls for input. If you
don't supply any input, `read()` returns without setting the `c` variable,
which retains its `0` value and so you see `0`s getting printed out. If you
type really fast, you can see that `read()` returns right away after each
keypress, so it's not like you can only read one keypress every tenth of a
second.

## Error handling

`enableRawMode()` now gets us fully into raw mode. It's time to clean up the
code by adding some error handling.

### The `die()` function

First, we'll add a `die()` function that prints an error message and exits the
program.

{{die}}

`perror()` comes from `<stdio.h>`, and `exit()` comes from `<stdlib.h>`.

Most C library functions that fail will set the global `errno` variable to
indicate what the error was. `perror()` looks at the global `errno` variable
and prints a descriptive error message for it. It also prints the string given
to it before the error message, which is meant to provide context about what
part of your code caused the error.

After printing out the error message, we exit the program with an exit status
of `1`, which indicates failure (as would any non-zero value).

### Check library calls for failure

Let's check each of our library calls for failure, and call `die()` when they
fail.

{{error-handling}}

`tcsetattr()`, `tcgetattr()`, and `read()` all return `-1` on failure, and set
the `errno` value to indicate the error.

An easy way to make `tcgetattr()` fail is to give your program a text file or a
pipe as the standard input instead of your terminal. To give it a file as
standard input, run `./kilo <kilo.c`. To give it a pipe, run
`echo test | ./kilo`. Both should result in the same error from `tcgetattr()`,
something like `Inappropriate ioctl for device`.

## Sections

That just about concludes this chapter on entering raw mode. The last thing
we'll do now is split our code into sections. This will allow these diffs to be
shorter, as each section that isn't changed in a diff will be folded into a
single line.

{{sections}}

In the [next chapter](03.rawInputAndOutput.html), we'll do some more low-level
terminal input/output handling, and use that to draw to the screen and allow
the user to move the cursor around.

