# Raw input and output

## Press `Ctrl-Q` to quit

Last chapter we saw that the `Ctrl` key combined with alphabetic characters
seemed to map to the bytes `1..26`. We can use this to detect `Ctrl` key
combinations and map them to different operations in our editor. We'll start by
mapping `Ctrl-Q` to the quit operation.

{{ctrl-q}}

The `CTRL_KEY` macro bitwise-ANDs a character with the value `00011111`, in
binary. (In C, you generally specify bitmasks using hexadecimal, since C
doesn't have binary literals, and hexadecimal is more concise and readable once
you get used to it.) In other words, it sets the upper 3 bits of the character
to `0`. This mirrors what the `Ctrl` key does in the terminal: it strips the
6th and 7th bits from whatever key you press in combination with `Ctrl`, and
sends that. The ASCII character set seems to be designed this way on purpose.
(It is also similarly designed so that you can set and clear the 6th bit to
switch between lowercase and uppercase.)

## Refactor keyboard input

Let's make a function for low-level keypress reading, and another function for
handling each keypress with a `switch` statement.

{{refactor-input}}

`editorReadKey()`'s job is to wait for one keypress, and return it. Later,
we'll expand this function to handle escape sequences, which involves reading
multiple bytes that represent a single keypress, as is the case with the arrow
keys.

`editorProcessKeypress()` waits for a keypress, and then handles it. Later, it
will map various `Ctrl` key combinations and other special keys to different
editor functions, and insert any alphanumeric and other printable keys'
characters into the text that is being edited.

Note that `editorReadKey()` belongs in the `/*** terminal ***/` section because
it deals with low-level terminal input, whereas `editorProcessKeypress()`
belongs in the new `/*** input ***/` section because it deals with mapping keys
to editor functions at a much higher level.

Now we have vastly simplified `main()`, and we will try to keep it that way
from now on.

## Clear the screen

We are going to want to render the editor's user interface to the screen after
each keypress. Let's start by just clearing the screen.

{{clear-screen}}

`write()` and `STDOUT_FILENO` come from `<unistd.h>`.

The `4` in our `write()` call means we are writing `4` bytes out to the
terminal. The first byte is `\x1b`, which is the escape character, or `27` in
decimal. (Try and remember `\x1b`, we will be using it a lot.) The other three
bytes are `[2J`.

We are writing an *escape sequence* to the terminal. Escape sequences always
start with an escape character (`27`) followed by a `[` character, which turns
out to be `0011011 1011011` in binary. Escape sequences instruct the terminal
to do various text formatting tasks, such as coloring text, moving the cursor
around, and clearing parts of the screen.

We are using the `J` command
([Erase In Display](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#ED)) to clear
the screen. Escape sequence commands take arguments, which come before the
command. In this case the argument is `2`, which says to clear the entire
screen. `<esc>[1J` would clear the screen up to where the cursor is, and
`<esc>[0J` would clear the screen from the cursor up to the end of the screen.
Also, `0` is the default argument for `J`, so just `<esc>[J` by itself would
also clear the screen from the cursor to the end.

For our text editor, we will be using
[VT100](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VT100) escape sequences, which
are supported very widely by modern terminal emulators. See the
[VT100 User Guide](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html) for complete
documentation of each escape sequence.

If we wanted to support the maximum number of terminals out there, we could use
the [ncurses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ncurses) library, which uses the
[terminfo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terminfo) database to figure out the
capabilities of a terminal and what escape sequences to use for that particular
terminal.

## Reposition the cursor

You may notice that the `<esc>[2J` command left the cursor at the bottom of the
screen. Let's reposition it at the top-left corner so that we're ready to draw
the editor interface from top to bottom.

{{cursor-home}}

This escape sequence is only `3` bytes long, and uses the `H` command
([Cursor Position](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CUP)) to
position the cursor. The `H` command takes two arguments: the row number and
the column number at which to position the cursor. So if you have a `80x24`
size terminal and you want the cursor in the center, you could use the command
`<esc>[12;40H`. (Multiple arguments are separated by a `;` character.) The
default arguments for `H` both happen to be `1`, so we can leave both arguments
out and it will position the cursor at the first row and first column, as if we
had sent the `<esc>[1;1H` command. (Rows and columns are numbered starting at
`1`, not `0`.)

## Clear the screen on exit

Let's clear the screen and reposition the cursor when our program exits. If an
error occurs in the middle of rendering the screen, we don't want a bunch of
garbage left over on the screen, and we don't want the error to be printed
wherever the cursor happens to be at that point.

{{clear-screen-exit}}

We have two exit points we want to clear the screen at: `die()`, and when the
user presses `Ctrl-Q` to quit.

## Tildes

It's time to start drawing. Let's start by drawing a column of tildes (`~`) on
the left hand side of the screen, like [vim](http://www.vim.org/) does. In our
text editor, we'll draw a tilde at the beginning of any lines that come after
the end of the file being edited.

{{tildes}}

`editorDrawRows()` will handle drawing each row of the buffer of text being
edited. For now it draws a tilde in each row, which means that row is not part
of the file and contains no text.

We don't know the size of the terminal yet, so we don't know how many rows to
draw. For now we just draw `24` rows.

After we're done drawing, we do another `<esc>[H` escape sequence to reposition
the cursor back up at the top-left corner.

## Global state

Our next goal is to get the size of the terminal, so we know how many rows to
draw in `editorDrawRows()`. But first, let's set up a global struct that will
contain our editor state, which we'll use to store the width and height of the
terminal. For now, let's just put our `orig_termios` global into the struct.

{{global-state}}

Our global variable containing our editor state is named `E`. We must replace
all occurrences of `orig_termios` with `E.orig_termios`.

## Window size, the easy way

On most systems, you should be able to get the size of the terminal by simply
calling `ioctl()` with the `TIOCGWINSZ` request. (As far as I can tell, it
stands for **T**erminal **IOC**tl (which itself stands for **I**nput/**O**utput
**C**on**t**ro**l**) **G**et **WIN**dow **S**i**Z**e.)

{{window-size-ioctl}}

`ioctl()`, `TIOCGWINSZ`, and `struct winsize` come from `<sys/ioctl.h>`.

On success, `ioctl()` will place the number of columns wide and the number of
rows high the terminal is into the given `winsize` struct. On failure,
`ioctl()` returns `-1`. We also check to make sure the values it gave back
weren't `0`, because apparently that's a possible outcome. If `ioctl()` failed
in either way, we have `getWindowSize()` report failure itself by returning
`-1`. If it succeeded, we pass the values back by setting the `int` references
that were passed to the function. (This is a common approach to having
functions return multiple values in C. It also allows you to use the return
value to indicate success or failure.)

Now let's add `screenrows` and `screencols` to our global editor state, and
call `getWindowSize()` to fill in those values.

{{init-editor}}

`initEditor()`'s job will be to initialize all the editor state.

Now we're ready to display the proper number of tildes on the screen:

{{window-size-screenrows}}

## Window size, the hard way

`ioctl()` isn't guaranteed to be able to request the window size on all
systems, so we are going to provide a fallback method of getting the window
size. Unfortunately, it's a complex procedure, but it's pretty much guaranteed
to work.

The strategy is to position the cursor at the bottom-right of the screen, then
use escape sequences that let us query the position of the cursor. That tells
us how many rows and columns there must be on the screen.

Let's start by moving the cursor to the bottom-right.

{{bottom-right}}

As you might have gathered from the code, there is no simple "move the cursor
to the bottom-right corner" command.

We are sending two escape sequences one after the other. The `C` command
([Cursor Forward](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CUF)) moves the
cursor to the right, and the `B` command
([Cursor Down](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CUD)) moves the
cursor down. The argument says how much to move it right or down by. We use a
very large value, `999`, which should ensure that the cursor reaches the right
and bottom edges of the screen.

The `C` and `B` commands are specifically
[documented](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CUD) to stop the
cursor from going past the edge of the screen. The reason we don't use the
`<esc>[999;999H` command is that the
[documentation](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CUP) doesn't
specify what happens when you try to move the cursor off-screen.

Also notice we are sticking a `1 ||` at the front of our `if` condition
temporarily, so that we can test this fallback branch we are developing.

Next we need to get the cursor position. The `n` command
([Device Status Report](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#DSR)) can
be used to query the terminal for status information. We want to give it an
argument of `6` to ask for the cursor position. Then we can read the reply from
standard input. Let's print out each character from standard input to see what
the reply looks like.

{{cursor-query}}

The reply is an escape sequence! (You may have to scroll up to see the output,
since we're clearing the screen on exit.) It's an escape character (`27`),
followed by a `[` character, and then the actual response: `35;115R`, or
similar. (This escape sequence is documented as
[Cursor Position Report](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#CPR).)

We're going to have to parse this response. But first, let's read it into a
buffer. We'll keep reading characters until we get to the `R` character.

{{response-buffer}}

When we print out the buffer, we don't want to print the `'\x1b'` character,
because the terminal would interpret it as an escape sequence and wouldn't
display it. So we skip the first character in `buf` by passing `&buf[1]` to
`printf()`. `printf()` expects strings to end with a `0` byte, so we make sure
to assign `'\0'` to the final byte of `buf`.

If you run the program, you'll see we have the response in `buf` in the form of
`<esc>[35;115`. Let's parse the two numbers out of there using `sscanf()`:

{{parse-response}}

`sscanf()` comes from `<stdio.h>`.

First we make sure it responded with an escape sequence. Then we pass a pointer
to the third character of `buf` to `sscanf()`, skipping the `'\x1b'` and `[`
characters. So we are passing a string of the form `35;115` to `sscanf()`. We
are also passing it the string `%d;%d` which tells it to parse two integers
separated by a `;`, and put the values into the `rows` and `cols` variables.

Our fallback method for getting the window size is now complete. You should see
that `editorDrawRows()` prints the correct number of tildes for the height of
your terminal.

Now that we know that works, let's remove the `1 ||` we put in the `if`
condition temporarily.

{{cleanup-window-size}}

## The last line

Maybe you noticed the last line of the screen doesn't seem to have a tilde.
That's because of a small bug in our code. When we print the final tilde, we
then print a `"\r\n"` like on any other line, but this causes the terminal to
scroll in order to make room for a new, blank line. Let's make the last line an
exception when we print our `"\r\n"`'s.

{{last-line}}

## Append buffer

It's not a good idea to make a whole bunch of small `write()`'s every time we
refresh the screen. It would be better to do one big `write()`, to make sure
the whole screen updates at once. Otherwise there could be small
unpredictable pauses between `write()`'s, which would cause an annoying flicker
effect.

We want to replace all our `write()` calls with code that appends the string to
a buffer, and then `write()` this buffer at the end. Unfortunately, C doesn't
have dynamic strings, so we'll create our own dynamic string type that supports
one operation: appending.

Let's start by making a new `/*** append buffer ***/` section, and define the
`abuf` struct under it.

{{abuf-struct}}

An append buffer consists of a pointer to our buffer in memory, and a length.
We define an `ABUF_INIT` constant which represents an empty buffer. This acts
as a constructor for our `abuf` type.

Next, let's define the `abAppend()` operation, as well as the `abFree()`
operation.

{{abuf-append}}

`realloc()` and `free()` come from `<stdlib.h>`. `memcpy()` comes from
`<string.h>`.

To append a string `s` to an `abuf`, the first thing we do is make sure we
allocate enough memory to hold the new string. We ask `realloc()` to give us a
block of memory that is the size of the current string plus the size of the
string we are appending. `realloc()` will either extend the size of the block
of memory we already have allocated, or it will take care of `free()`ing the
current block of memory and allocating a new block of memory somewhere else
that is big enough for our new string.

Then we use `memcpy()` to copy the string `s` after the end of the current data
in the buffer, and we update the pointer and length of the `abuf` to the new
values.

`abFree()` is a destructor that deallocates the memory used by an `abuf`.

Okay, our `abuf` is ready to be used.

{{abuf-ab}}

In `editorRefreshScreen()`, we first initialize a new `abuf` called `ab`, by
assigning `ABUF_INIT` to it. We then replace each occurrence of
`write(STDOUT_FILENO, ...);` with `abAppend(&ab, ...)`. We also pass `ab` into
`editorDrawRows()`, so it can also use `abAppend()`. Lastly, we `write()` the
buffer's contents out to standard output, and free the memory used by `abuf`.

## Hide the cursor when repainting

There is another possible source of the annoying flicker effect we will take
care of now. It's possible that the cursor might be displayed in the middle of
the screen somewhere for a split second while the terminal is drawing to the
screen. To make sure that doesn't happen, let's hide the cursor before
refreshing the screen, and show it again immediately after the refresh
finishes.

{{hide-cursor}}

We use escape sequences to tell the terminal to hide and show the cursor. The
`h` and `l` commands
([Set Mode](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#SM),
[Reset Mode](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#RM)) are used to turn
on and turn off various terminal features or
["modes"](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#S3.3.4). The VT100 User
Guide just linked to doesn't document argument `25` which we use above. It
appears the cursor hiding/showing feature appeared in
[later VT models](http://vt100.net/docs/vt510-rm/DECTCEM.html). So some
terminals might not support hiding/showing the cursor, but if they don't, then
they will just ignore those escape sequences, which isn't a big deal in this
case.

## Clear lines one at a time

Instead of clearing the entire screen before each refresh, it seems more
optimal to clear each line as we redraw them. Let's remove the `<esc>[2J`
(clear entire screen) escape sequence, and instead put a `<esc>[K` sequence at
the end of each line we draw.

{{clear-rest-of-line}}

The `K` command
([Erase In Line](http://vt100.net/docs/vt100-ug/chapter3.html#EL)) erases part
of the current line. Its argument is analogous to the `J` command's argument:
`2` erases the whole line, `1` erases the part of the line to the left of the
cursor, and `0` erases the part of the line to the right of the cursor. `0` is
the default argument, and that's what we want, so we leave out the argument and
just use `<esc>[K`.

## Welcome message

Perhaps it's time to display a welcome message. Let's display the name of our
editor and a version number a third of the way down the screen.

{{welcome}}

`snprintf()` comes from `<stdio.h>`.

We use the `welcome` buffer and `snprintf()` to interpolate our `KILO_VERSION`
string into the welcome message. We also truncate the length of the string in
case the terminal is too tiny to fit our welcome message.

Now let's center it.

{{welcome-center}}

To center a string, you divide the screen width by `2`, and then subtract half
of the string's length from that. In other words:
`E.screencols/2 - welcomelen/2`, which simplifies to
`(E.screencols - welcomelen) / 2`. That tells you how far from the left edge of
the screen you should start printing the string. So we fill that space with
space characters, except for the first character, which should be a tilde.

## Move the cursor

Let's focus on input now. We want the user to be able to move the cursor
around. The first step is to keep track of the cursor's `x` and `y` position in
the global editor state.

{{cx-cy}}

`E.cx` is the horizontal coordinate of the cursor (the column) and `E.cy` is
the vertical coordinate (the row). We initialize both of them to `0`, as we
want the cursor to start at the top-left of the screen. (Since the C language
uses indexes that start from `0`, we will use 0-indexed values wherever
possible.)

Now let's add code to `editorRefreshScreen()` to move the cursor to the
position stored in `E.cx` and `E.cy`.

{{set-cursor-position}}

We changed the old `H` command into an `H` command with arguments, specifying
the exact position we want the cursor to move to. (Make sure you deleted the
old `H` command, as the above diff makes it easy to miss that.)

We add `1` to `E.cy` and `E.cx` to convert from 0-indexed values to the
1-indexed values that the terminal uses.

At this point, you could try initializing `E.cx` to `10` or something, or
insert `E.cx++;` into the main loop, to confirm that the code works as intended
so far.

Next, we'll allow the user to move the cursor using the `wasd` keys. (If you're
unfamiliar with `wasd`: `w` is your up arrow, `s` is your down arrow, `a` is
left, `d` is right.)

{{move-cursor}}

Now you should be able to move the cursor around with those keys.

## Arrow keys

Now that we have a way of mapping keypresses to move the cursor, let's replace
the `wasd` keys with the arrow keys. Last chapter we saw that pressing an
arrow key sends multiple bytes as input to our program. These bytes are in the
form of an escape sequence that starts with `'\x1b'`, `'['`, followed by an
`'A'`, `'B'`, `'C'`, or `'D'` depending on which of the four arrow keys was
pressed. Let's modify `editorReadKey()` to read escape sequences of this form
as a single keypress.

{{detect-arrow-keys}}

If we read an escape character, we immediately read two more bytes into the
`seq` buffer. If either of these reads time out (after 0.1 seconds), then we
assume the user just pressed the escape key and return that. Otherwise we look
to see if the escape sequence is an arrow key escape sequence. If it is, we
just return the corresponding `wasd` character, for now. If it's not an escape
sequence we recognize, we just return the escape character.

We make the `seq` buffer 3 bytes long because we will be handling longer escape
sequences in the future.

We have basically aliased the arrow keys to the `wasd` keys. This gets the
arrow keys working immediately, but leaves the `wasd` keys still mapped to the
`editorMoveCursor()` function. What we want is for `editorReadKey()` to return
special values for each arrow key that let us identify that a particular arrow
key was pressed.

Let's start by replacing each instance of the `wasd` characters with the
constants `ARROW_UP`, `ARROW_LEFT`, `ARROW_DOWN`, and `ARROW_RIGHT`.

{{arrow-keys-enum}}

Now we just have to choose a representation for arrow keys other than `wasd`,
in the `editorKey` enum. We will give them a large integer value that is out of
the range of a `char`, so that they don't conflict with any ordinary
keypresses. We will also have to change all variables that store keypresses to
be of type `int` instead of `char`.

{{arrow-keys-int}}

By setting the first constant in the enum to `1000`, the rest of the constants
get incrementing values of `1001`, `1002`, `1003`, and so on.

That concludes our arrow key handling code. At this point, it can be fun to try
entering an escape sequence manually while the program runs. Try pressing the
escape key, the `[` key, and a capital `C` in sequence really fast, and you may
see your keypresses being interpreted as the right arrow key being pressed. You
have to be pretty fast to do it, so you may want to adjust the `VTIME` value
in `enableRawMode()` temporarily, to make it easier. (It also helps to know
that pressing `Ctrl+[` is the same as pressing the escape key, for the same
reason that `Ctrl+M` is the same as pressing enter: `Ctrl` clears the 6th and
7th bits of the character you type in combination with it.)

## Prevent moving the cursor off screen

Currently, you can cause the `E.cx` and `E.cy` values to go into the negatives,
or go past the right and bottom edges of the screen. Let's prevent that by
doing some bounds checking in `editorMoveCursor()`.

{{off-screen}}

## Page Up and Page Down

To complete our low-level terminal code, we need to detect a few more special
keypresses that use escape sequences, like the arrow keys did. We'll start with
the `Page Up` and `Page Down` keys. `Page Up` is sent as `<esc>[5~` and `Page
Down` is sent as `<esc>[6~`.

{{detect-page-up-down}}

Now you see why we declared `seq` to be able to store 3 bytes. If the byte
after `[` is a digit, we read another byte expecting it to be a `~`. Then we
test the digit byte to see if it's a `5` or a `6`.

Okay, let's make `Page Up` and `Page Down` do something now. For now, we'll
have them move the cursor to the top of the screen or the bottom of the screen.

{{page-up-down-simple}}

We create a code block with that pair of braces so that we're allowed to
declare the `times` variable. (You can't declare variables directly inside a
`switch` statement.) We simulate the user pressing the Up or Down keys enough
times to move to the top or bottom of the screen. Implementing `Page Up` and
`Page Down` in this way will make it a lot easier for us later, when we
implement scrolling.

If you're on a laptop with an `Fn` key, you may be able to press `Fn+Up` and
`Fn+Down` to simulate pressing the `Page Up` and `Page Down` keys.

## Home and End keys

Now let's implement the `Home` and `End` keys. Like the previous keys, these
keys also send escape sequences. Unlike the previous keys, there are many
different escape sequences that could be sent by these keys, depending on your
OS, or your terminal emulator, or who knows what. The `Home` key could be sent
as `<esc>[1~`, `<esc>[7~`, `<esc>[H`, or even `<esc>OH`. Similarly, the `End`
key could be sent as `<esc>[4~`, `<esc>[8~`, `<esc>[F`, or `<esc>OF`. Let's
handle all of these cases.

{{detect-home-end-keys}}

Now let's make `Home` and `End` do something. For now, we'll have them move the
cursor to the left or right edges of the screen.

{{home-end-keys-simple}}

If you're on a laptop with an `Fn` key, you may be able to press `Fn+Left` and
`Fn+Right` to simulate pressing the `Home` and `End` keys.

## Delete key

Lastly, let's detect when the `Delete` key is pressed. It simply sends the
escape sequence `<esc>[3~`, so it's easy to add to our switch statement. We
won't make this key do anything for now.

{{detect-delete-key}}

If you're on a laptop with an `Fn` key, you may be able to press `Fn+Backspace`
to simulate pressing the `Delete` key.

In the [next chapter](04.aTextViewer.html), we will get our program to display
text files, complete with vertical and horizontal scrolling and a status bar.

