# A text viewer

## A line viewer

Let's create a data type for storing a row of text in our editor.

{{single-line-erow}}

`erow` stands for "editor row", and stores a line of text as a pointer to the
dynamically-allocated character data and a length. The `typedef` lets us refer
to the type as `erow` instead of `struct erow`. We'll be using the `erow`
struct in a lot of our code, so it helps to have a shorter name for it.

We add an `erow` value to the editor global state, as well as a `numrows`
variable. For now, the editor will only display a single line of text, and so
`numrows` can be either `0` or `1`. We initialize it to `0` in `initEditor()`.

Let's fill that `erow` with some text now. We won't worry about reading from a
file just yet. Instead, we'll put a "Hello, world" string into it.

{{single-line-hardcoded}}

`ssize_t` comes from `<sys/types.h>`.

`editorOpen()` will eventually be for opening and reading a file from disk, so
we put it in a new `/*** file i/o ***/` section. To load our "Hello, world"
message into the editor's `erow` struct, we set the `size` field to the length
of our message, `malloc()` the necessary memory, and `memcpy()` the message to
the `chars` field which points to the memory we allocated. Finally, we set the
`E.numrows` variable to `1`, to indicate that the `erow` now contains a line
that should be displayed.

Let's display it then.

{{single-line-render}}

We wrap our previous row-drawing code in an `if` statement that checks whether
we are currently drawing a row that is part of the text buffer, or a row that
comes after the end of the text buffer.

To draw a row that's part of the text buffer, we simply write out the `chars`
field of the `erow`. But first, we take care to truncate the rendered line if
it would go past the end of the screen.

Next, let's allow the user to open an actual file. We'll read and display the
first line of the file.

{{single-line-file}}

`FILE`, `fopen()`, and `getline()` come from `<stdio.h>`.

The core of `editorOpen()` is the same, we just get the `line` and `linelen`
values from `getline()` now, instead of hard-coded values.

Of course, `editorOpen()` now takes a filename and opens the file for reading
using `fopen()`. We allow the user to choose a file to open by checking if they
passed a filename as a command line argument. If they did, we call
`editorOpen()` and pass it the filename. If they ran `./kilo` with no
arguments, `editorOpen()` will not be called and they'll start with a blank
file.

`getline()` is useful for reading lines from a file when we don't know how much
memory to allocate for each line. `getline()` takes care of memory management
for you. First, we pass it a NULL `line` pointer and a `linecap` (line
capacity) of `0`. So it will allocate memory for the next line it reads, and
set `line` to point to the memory, and set `linecap` to let you know how much
memory it allocated. Its return value is the actual length of the line it read,
or `-1` if it hits the end of file. Later, when we have `editorOpen()` read
multiple lines of a file, we will be able to feed the new `line` and `linecap`
values back into `getline()` over and over, and it will try and reuse the
memory that `line` points to as long as the `linecap` is enough to fit the next
line it reads. For now, we just copy the one line it reads into `E.row.chars`,
and `free()` the `line` that `getline()` allocated.

We also strip off the newline or carriage return at the end of the line before
copying it into our `erow`. We know each `erow` represents one line of text, so
there's no use storing a newline character at the end of each one. It would
actually get in the way and be annoying later when we started implementing
various operations on `erow`s.

If your compiler complains about `getline()`, you may need to define a [feature
test macro](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Feature-Test-Macros.html).
Even if it compiles fine on your machine without them, let's add them to make
our code more portable.

{{getline-defines}}

We add them above our includes, because the header files use the macros to
decide what features to expose when we include them.

Now let's fix a quick bug. We want the welcome message to only display when the
user starts the program with no arguments, and not when they open a file, as
the welcome message could get in the way of displaying the file in that case.

{{hide-welcome-message}}

There, now the welcome message only displays if the text buffer is completely
empty.

## Multiple lines

{{multiple-lines-struct}}

{{append-row}}

{{fix-append-row}}

{{render-multiple-lines}}

{{read-multiple-lines}}

## Vertical scrolling

{{filerow}}

{{vertical-scroll}}

## Horizontal scrolling

{{horizontal-scroll}}

## Limit scrolling to the right

{{scroll-limits}}

## Snap cursor to end of line

{{snap-cursor}}

## Moving left at the start of a line

{{moving-left}}

## Moving right at the end of a line

{{moving-right}}

## Rendering tabs

{{render-tabs}}

## Tabs and the cursor

{{rx}}

## Page Up and Page Down

{{page-up-down}}

## Home and End keys

{{home-end-keys}}

## Status bar

{{status-bar}}

## Status message

{{status-message}}

